How One’s Life Shapes Their Views and Futures
      People always wonder why they live the way they do. Regarding how people lead their 
lives, Carol Dweck makes the argument, “The view you adopt for yourself profoundly affects the 
way you live your life. It can determine whether you become the person you want to be and 
whether you accomplish the things you value.” Others also explore the concept of one’s view 
and its impact on life. Barbara Fredrickson in “Love 2.0: How Our Supreme Emotion Affects 
Everything We Feel, Think, Do, and Become” discusses ways in which love shapes the views 
people live by. Oliver Sacks in “The Mind’s Eye” provides several anecdotes that illustrate how 
views are formed and their effects. Daniel Gilbert in “Immune To Reality” discusses how the 
inner workings of the brain create the views that impact one’s life. Dweck’s argument has its 
strengths and weaknesses. Although one’s view does affect the way one lives, an individual does 
not consciously adopt his or her views. Fredrickson, Sacks, and Gilbert illustrate how life-
changing experiences, human interactions, and everyday experiences shape the views that affect 
one’s life.
      First, life-changing experiences and events shape the views that affect an individual’s 
life. Within “Immune To Reality” Dan Gilbert discusses how major life-changing events can 
shape one’s views. Gilbert writes, “Apparently, inescapable circumstances trigger the 
psychological defenses that enable us to achieve positive views of those circumstances” (Gilbert 
138). Gilbert’s statement implies that the brain generates new views on life in response to 
situations that one cannot overcome. For example, a new view may be created from on an 
inescapable disability such as blindness. Oliver Sacks illustrates this scenario through John 
Hull’s account within “The Mind’s Eye”. Regarding Hull’s blindness Sacks states, “Hull had 
apparently become so nonvisual in his imagery and memory as to resemble someone who had 
been blind from birth… for Hull, meat shifting…to the other senses” (Sacks 330). Hull’s brain 
creates a new non-visual view in response to his blindness. Hull’s blindness is an ideal example 
for Gilbert’s claim. That is because Hull’s brain shifted to a non-visual view in response to an 
inescapable circumstance. The shift provides Hull with a different but as rich a perception of the 
world he had before. For Hull, that would be a positive outcome or view for his inescapable 
situation. Furthermore, John Hull’s experience is in direct contradiction with Dweck’s false 
assumption. The problem with Dweck’s claim is that she assumes an individual consciously 
adopts his or her own view. Hull, however, did not consciously decide to adopt a non-visual 
view. Rather, Hull’s new perception was the product of his blindness. As a response to Hull’s 
blindness, his brain changed the way it functioned. Hull’s brain shifted its focus to the other 
senses. This shift allowed Hull to cope with his blindness. Moreover, Hull’s example validates 
Dweck’s assertion that one’s view greatly affects their lives. Hull’s new non-visual view is how 
he perceives the world around him. This new view will determine how he interacts with his 
surroundings. Additionally, other accounts in “The Mind’s Eye” also demonstrate how one’s 
view affects one’s life. For example, Zoltan Torey became blind as an adult like Hull but 
retained a visual perception of the world (Sacks 333). Torey interacts with his surroundings 
through his more visual view. Thus, Torey’s visual view is crucial to his way of life. Torey and 
Hull’s examples demonstrate how one’s views impact their life. Gilbert and Sacks demonstrate 
how the view that affects one’s life originate from life-changing experiences. 
	Additionally, the views that shape the way one lives can be forged from both positive and 
negative human interactions. Barbara Fredrickson discusses the effects of positive human 
interactions. Fredrickson writes, “…micro-moments of love, of positivity resonance, can be 
viewed as the doorways through which caring and compassionate communities are forged. 
Love…builds lasting resources” (Fredrickson 117). Fredrickson is stating that positive 
interactions between people create a love and compassion within in people. Fredrickson’s 
statement implies that a positive view of others originates from positive human interaction. 
Although, Fredrickson discusses how people attain views from human interaction, it is limited to 
how people view each other. Oliver Sacks, however, illustrates how other types of world views 
originate from human interaction. Sacks writes, “Torey’s father…would often give his son 
scripts to read. ‘This,’ Torey wrote, ‘gave me the opportunity to visualize stories…to work my 
imagination…’” (Sacks 332). Sacks included this account by Torey to show how Torey’s more 
visual view of the world was created. Torey’s visual perception of the world originated from his 
interactions with his father. Torey received scripts from his father that he would read and 
imagine. This practice built Torey’s visualization ability and his tendency to view the world in a 
visual manner. Sacks and Fredrickson both demonstrate how one’s views are the result of 
positive interactions. Unlike Sacks and Fredrickson, Gilbert explores the effects of negative 
human interaction. Gilbert explains that when someone is judged negatively by a judge, their 
brains subconsciously creates a positive view of the situation by looking for flaws within the 
judge (Gilbert 134). Gilbert explains that one’s brain creates a positive view of one’s self in the 
face of rejection. In contrast, Fredrickson illustrates how positive view are the result of positive 
interactions. Love and compassion, the result of positive interactions, require a positive view of 
others. Thus positive human interactions create positive views not an individual’s choice. 
Similarly, Torey’s visual perception originated from his interactions with his father not by his 
own design. Gilbert, Sacks, and Fredrickson all provide instances in which people 
subconsciously develop world views in response to human interaction. Their examples contradict 
Dweck’s idea that people adopt views for themselves. However, as per Dweck’s assertion, each 
of these views are long lasting and impactful. Fredrickson and Gilbert explain how views 
regarding how one views oneself and others are formed. These views will determine how people 
interact with one another and decisions they make regarding themselves. Sacks discusses the 
views that people have of the world around them. These views affect the way individuals 
perceive and interact with the world around them. Human interactions shape the views people 
develop and those views impact how they live their life.
	Furthermore, Fredrickson and Gilbert provide evidence that demonstrates one’s views are 
shaped by everyday experiences. Fredrickson discusses how engaging in everyday activities with 
others generates positive views. Fredrickson writes, “…subtle ebb and flow of oxytocin during 
more typical day-to-day activities” (Fredrickson 114), as well as, “…under influence of 
oxytocin, you grow calmer, more attuned…friendlier…” (Fredrickson 120). According to 
Fredrickson, the oxytocin released from everyday activities with others creates a calmer and 
friendlier view. Fredrickson makes a compelling point regarding how one’s views are shaped by 
everyday experiences, but it is limited to activities shared with others. Gilbert, on the other hand, 
explores broader means by which everyday experiences shape views. Gilbert discusses the 
brain’s tendencies for generating explanations. Gilbert states, “…when experiences are 
unpleasant, we quickly move to explain them…” (Gilbert 140), and, “Explanations allow us to 
understand…an event…which allows us to see how and why it might happen again” (Gilbert 
141). According to Gilbert, one develops a view of their situation by explaining it. An individual 
will understand a situation and its components based on how they explain it. The way one 
understands something is how they then view it. In both Gilbert and Fredrickson’s discussions 
one does not consciously adopt their views. The views are created or shaped from everyday 
experiences. Fredrickson describes how positive views emerge from the release of oxytocin 
during everyday experiences shared with others. In Gilbert’s scenario, the view is a byproduct of 
one’s explanation of certain experiences. Gilbert states that it happens when things are 
“unpleasant” and that can refer to small unpleasant things one faces every day or major 
unpleasant experiences. In either case one does not simply adopt a view but attain it from their 
experience. Furthermore, the view that is attained greatly affects how one lives their life. A 
positive view from shared experiences will lead to positive interactions with other people. On the 
other hand, a view generated from an unpleasant experience will keep one wary of similar 
circumstances. Fredrickson and Gilbert demonstrate how everyday life experiences generate the 
views that shape one’s life.   
	Carol Dweck’s assertion that one consciously adopts the views that affect their lives has 
both strong and weak points. Barbara Fredrickson, Oliver Sacks, and Daniel Gilbert provide 
several examples that illustrate one does not consciously adopt the views that impact their lives. 
The views that impact one’s life are shaped through life-changing experiences, human 
interactions, and through everyday activities. Although there might be some cases where a 
person might choose a particular view, that choice would ultimately be based on the views that 
were already subconsciously developed. The concept of one’s view and its impact on their life 
affects everyone. It would be most beneficial for people to examine their past experiences and 
how they have shaped their current views. People can make the best of their lives and their views 
by examining their experiences and by exposing themselves to new experiences to shape their 
views.
