The Absolute and Malleable Nature of Reality 
      Everything and every experience is an aspect of the reality people are in. When one 
thinks of reality one must also ponder its relation to human creativity. Can human creativity 
shape reality or is reality absolute? Ethan Watters explores reality of depression and its 
connection to the creativity of the media and pharmaceutical marketers in “The Mega-Marketing 
of Depression In Japan”. Oliver Sacks in “The Mind’s Eye” illustrates how human creativity is 
related to people’s perception of reality through the accounts and experiences of several blind 
individuals. Reality is made up of multiple layers, some of which are absolute while others are 
shaped through individual creativity and the creativity of groups within society.  
      There are layers of reality that are absolute and experienced universally by everyone. 
Ethan Watters references Kirmayer and his discussion about the reality of depression across 
cultures. Kirmayer is a researcher who studied different expressions of depression across cultures 
(Watters 517). Watters writes, “He had found that every culture has a type of experience…of 
depression…that relate to a loss of connectedness to others…but he had also found that cultures 
have unique expressions…for these states of being” (Watters 517). Watters statement establishes 
two layers to the topic of depression. One layer is what depression is and the other is how 
depression is expressed. Additionally, Oliver Sacks’ discussion of the blind and their experiences 
establishes a similar scenario. In this scenario, several blind people compare their experience of 
being blind to John Hull’s experience. John Hull completely lost his mental visual imagery after 
becoming blind. Sacks writes, “Many of these people wrote that they could not identify with 
Hull’s experience and said that they themselves, even decades after losing their sight, had never 
lost their visual images…” (Sacks 331). Sacks shows that the reality of blindness includes not 
having sight and how people perceive the world after losing their sight. Those who are blind lose 
their sight and cannot physically see regardless of their own creativity. This is the absolute layer 
for the reality of blindness, since the loss of sight is experienced universally. However, how a 
person perceives the world without sight depends on one’s creativity and experiences. This 
concept is evident since Sacks’ statement demonstrates people may have different experiences 
after blindness. Furthermore, the same situation can be observed with the concept of depression. 
Regardless of culture, depression is associated with loss of connectedness with others. That is 
because within Kirmayer’s study this experience is found in every culture. This consistency 
implies that the loss of connectedness cannot be changed regardless of creativity. The loss of 
connectedness then becomes the absolute layer in the reality of depression. How depression is 
expressed varies throughout the cultures. The variations imply that this aspect of depression is 
not concrete but rather malleable. The expressions of depression can be shaped through factors 
such as human creativity. Sacks and Watters both demonstrate that parts of reality are absolute 
and experienced universally while other parts may be different in different circumstances.   
      Furthermore, individual creativity shapes the layers of reality that are not absolute. For 
example, Ethan Watters illustrates this when discussing why pharmaceutical CEOs believe they 
push SSRIs for depression. SSRIs are drugs that people believe treat depression. Watters writes, 
“‘These executives seemed to believe that they are…trying to heal the world’…” (Watters 528). 
Regarding the drug Watters writes, “Under even the mildest scrutiny…the scientific validity of 
SSRIs begin to break down” (Watters 529), as well as, “SSRIs…may sometimes help a 
patient…” (Watters 529). The reality of CEO’s pushing SSRIs is absolute, while why they push 
SSRIs is open to interpretation. The CEOs’ creativity leads them to believe they are helping 
people. Watters provides a broad example regarding how a particular group of people and their 
perceptions. Oliver Sacks, however, discusses the distinct difference creativity creates between 
two people. Sacks describes how two blind individuals, John Hull and Zoltan Torey, perceive the 
world after blindness. Sacks states, “Hull, who did not use his imagery in a deliberate way, lost 
it…Torey maintained a cautious and ‘scientific’ attitude to his own visual imagery…” (Sacks 
333). Hull and Torey uniformly experience the loss of sight and reliance on other senses. 
However, how they perceive the world despite their blindness differs based on their creativity. 
Creativity, in this case, is the different means by which people interpret the same set of 
information. Torey retained a visual perception of the world despite receiving information only 
from senses such as touch or sound. Torey’s creativity includes processing the information from 
his senses in a visual manner. This visual interpretation is different from Hull who interprets the 
world in a non-visual manner. Thus, Torey interprets his information differently from Hull who 
has no visual imagery but has the same senses. Similarly, pharmaceutical CEOs pushing SSRIs 
interpreted the information on SSRIs differently than others. Watters’ statement shows that those 
who investigated SSRIs found that they are not effective. Although the effectiveness of SSRIs 
breakdown under scrutiny CEOs still believed they are being helpful to everyone. The CEOs’ 
conclusions are based on few moments where SSRIs were helpful and ignoring other critical 
information. The CEOs’ ignorance of information is a creative effort to manipulate information. 
Pharmaceutical CEOs edited which pieces of information they would absorb to reach a desired 
conclusion.  The CEOs look only at part of the information and interpret it differently. Both the 
blind and pharmaceutical CEOs utilize creativity to interpret the information around them 
differently. Creative efforts may include a more visual interpretation or the ignorance of 
particular pieces of information. The experience of reality depends on how one interprets the 
information around them. So if one’s interpretation of information can be changed due to 
creativity, then so can their experience of reality. Hence, one’s individual creativity can shape the 
experience of reality. Torey and Hull experience the reality of their surrounding in different 
manners due to their individual creativity. Pharmaceutical CEOs experience the reality of SSRIs 
differently due to their individual creativity. Sacks and Watters through their examples 
demonstrate how individual creativity can manipulate reality.  
 	The experience of reality can be altered due to the creative efforts of groups within 
society. First, Ethan Watters discusses how the Japanese view of sadness was shaped from the 
creative efforts of the media. Watters writes, “Feelings of overwhelming sadness were often 
venerated in television shows, movies, and popular songs…states of melancholy and sadness 
have been thought of as…personal hardships that build character” (Watters 522). Watters builds 
a connection between the Japanese seeing sadness as a positive thing and the creative efforts of 
the media. Watters statement implies that the portrayal of sadness in the media affected the way 
in which the Japanese see sadness. Furthermore, Watters also provides a similar scenario 
connecting the creativity of pharmaceutical marketers with how the Japanese view depression. 
Watters states, “The mega-marketing campaign often cam in disguised forms, such as patient 
advocacy groups that were created by the drug companies…they would have...a series of articles 
on depression…the idea that it was a common illness” (Watters 525). Pharmaceutical marketers 
creatively used their resources to change how the Japanese viewed depression. In both scenarios, 
human creativity is used by groups in society to shape how people view a certain topic. The 
Japanese media builds a positive view on sadness and the pharmaceuticals make depression seem 
like a common illness. This has an adverse effect on how individuals experience reality. The way 
a person views an aspect of reality such as sadness or depression is how they experience it. Thus, 
by creating a certain view of a topic groups in society can create the reality behind it. The efforts 
of the media and marketers show that human creativity can shape how people experience reality.     
	Reality is made of layers, some of which are experienced universally while others are 
shaped by human creativity. Ethan Watters’ “The Mega-Marketing of Depression in Japan” 
shows the connection between creativity and reality. Watters demonstrates how human creativity 
can shape how people view certain topics or their own intentions. Oliver Sacks’ “The Mind’s 
Eye” also draws a connection between creativity and reality. Sacks illustrates that although loss 
of sight is absolute amongst the blind the perception of the world differs due to creativity. While 
human creativity cannot change certain layers of reality, an individual’s creativity and the 
creativity of a group can shape the malleable layers. How reality is shaped through creativity is 
an important topic for people to consider and pay attention to. That’s because people’s lives are 
determined by how they experience reality. It is important of individuals to pay attention to how 
their own creativity and the creative efforts of others shape their experiences. People need to 
understand the relationship between creativity and reality to make the most of the reality they 
live in.
